Add tutorial how to set up a new debian server (#5)
hetzneronline/community-content: tutorials/debian_base_configuration_docker-en.md

# Basic configuration of a Debian server

## Introduction

In this tutorial, we will equip a newly created Debian server (Debian 9 Stretch) with a secure base configuration and install docker.

We will ...
  - create an unprivileged Sudo user
  - Prohibit password login
  - lock the root user
  - change the SSH port
  - set up a firewall
  - Install Docker and docker-compose
  - give our Sudo user access to Docker
  
If Docker is not required on the server, this step can of course be omitted.

 I have also created a [Cloud-Init](https://cloudinit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) configuration that allows all the steps we do in this tutorial to be applied automatically when creating a server.
 
## Steps

### Create Sudo user

Since one of the next steps will prevent us from logging in as root, we first need a new user with whom we can log in and administer the server.

We create the user `holu` with the following command:
```
adduser --disabled-password holu
```

> Since we want to deactivate the login with passwords, we do not need a password for our user and therefore deactivate it with the parameter `-d`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we want to deactivate the login with passwords, we do not need a password for our user and therefore deactivate it with the parameter `--disabled-password`.
```

To assign the permissions to the user, we create the file `/etc/sudoers.d/90-holu` with the following content:
```
holu ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD:ALL
```

### SSH

#### SSH server configuration

For additional security, we adjust the configuration of the SSH server. To do this we open `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` with a text editor of our choice (which of course should fall on [vim](https://www.vim.org/)), delete the contents of the file and insert the configuration below instead. The most important settings are explained below.
```
Protocol 2
Port 44933
HostKey /etc/ssh/ssh_host_rsa_key
HostKey /etc/ssh/ssh_host_ecdsa_key
HostKey /etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key
UsePrivilegeSeparation yes
KeyRegenerationInterval 3600
SyslogFacility AUTH
LogLevel INFO
PermitRootLogin no
StrictModes yes
IgnoreRhosts yes
RhostsRSAAuthentication no
HostbasedAuthentication no
PubkeyAuthentication yes
PasswordAuthentication no
ChallengeResponseAuthentication no
UsePAM yes
X11Forwarding no
PrintMotd no
AcceptEnv LANG LC_*
Subsystem sftp /usr/lib/openssh/sftp-server
AllowUsers holu
```

`Protocol 2` Ensures that the server only accepts connections via secure protocol version 2.

> `Port 44933` Changing the port does not increase security, but we can bypass most automated login attempts as they usually use only the default port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Port 44933` Changing the port does not increase security, but we can bypass most automated login attempts as they usually only use the default port.
```

`PermitRootLogin no` Prohibits login as root via SSH

`PasswordAuthentication no` Forbids login with passwords. We set this option because the login with a public key is more secure.

`PubkeyAuthentication yes` Enables authentication using SSH key pairs.

`StrictModes yes` Prevents the SSH server from starting if certain files have too loose permissions.

`AllowUsers holu` This option provides a whitelist for all users who are allowed to log in via SSH. We only allow our 'holu' user.

**Important**: *The server or the SSH service must not be restarted before the next steps are completed, otherwise the new configuration will become active, which will lock us out of the server.

> #### Creating an SSH key pair

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Creating a SSH key pair
```

> In the previous step we disabled the login with passwords, so we have to set and now set to the only remaining option, authentication with an SSH key pair.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous step we disabled the login with passwords, so we have to use now the only remaining option, authentication with a SSH key pair.
```

```

#### Activating the new configuration

Now that our key is stored on the server, we can activate the new configuration of the SSH server by restarting the SSH server.
```bash
systemctl restart sshd
```

We should now be able to connect to the server with the 'holu' user via the new SSH port, and authenticate using our SSH key pair.
```
ssh -p 44933 holu@<your_host>
```

**From here all steps are performed with the user 'holu'**.

### Firewall setup

To set up a firewall we will use the program 'ufw' (an abstraction of iptables), because the rules can be managed much easier and more comfortable than with iptables directly.

The 'ufw' package is not included in the default Debian installation and can be installed from the package manager.
```
sudo apt install ufw
```

We now create a rule that blocks all incoming connections that were not explicitly allowed.
```bash
sudo ufw default deny incoming
```

Before we activate the firewall, we must of course release our SSH port, otherwise we lock ourselves out of the server.
```bash
sudo ufw allow 44933/tcp
```

We can now activate the firewall with the following command.
```bash
sudo ufw enable
```

> With the command `ufw status` all created rules can be listed. This command must also be run as root.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the command `ufw status` all created rules can be listed. This command must also be executed as root.
```
